
> [!TI]
> [Syllabus](/bca-syllabus.md#multidisciplinary-course-introduction-to-social-work)

# UNIT I INTRODUCTION OF SOCIAL WORK

Social: Related to organizations/Society;
Work: The actions we perform;
Social work: The action which we perform for the society called as social work.

Introduction: Social work is a problem-solving profession. It is committed to improve the quality of human life by using different techniques and strategies. It helps to solve the problems of individuals, groups & communities of different places.

# Definition of social work
Social work is practice based profession concerned with meeting the basic needs of individuals, families, & groups, communities, and society as whole to enhance their individual & collective well-being.

Scope of social work: (SW)

Child Developments:
1. This is to ensure healthy growth and development of children.
2. It provides support and education to the children.
3. It also provides resources to parents.

Medical Social Work:
1. Here social work collaborates with professionals to meet the psychological
and emotional needs of patients and their families.
2. Clinical social work provides therapy and counselling to individuals, families
and groups dealing with mental health challenges.

International Social Work: This relates to social issues on a global scale.
They might work in disaster response, international development, advocacy for
human rights, etc.

Social welfare organisations: The process of organising and administering social work services in both private & public sector is known as social welfare organisation.

Community organization Social work takes place at community level can be called as Community organization. It includes the problems like water scarcity, poverty, unemployment, education and needs etc. are usually dealt within community organization.
Social Group work. Here the social worker helps the members of a group to develop their capabilities and potentialities. The growth and development of group members is promoted in social group work.

Objectives of social work. 
- To solve psycho-social problems like family conflicts, emotional distress etc.
(Psycho-social problems)
- To fulfill humanitarian needs like helping the poor, women, old-aged, child etc.
- Tofulfill humanitarian needs.
- To enhance and to improve confidence and to overcome challenges which is infront of us. [Enhance self-esteem].
- To create self-sufficiency.
- To improve positive relationship between families, communities etc. by promoting
understanding.

Strengthens social relations
To ensure social justice by fair distribution of resources and equal
opportunities for all. [Ensure social justice]

Functions of Social Work:
- Restoration
- Resource provision

The following are the three important functions of social work:
1. Restoration The social worker help the people to restore their abilities, skills and qualities so that they
also lead a normal life like any others or equitable person in deaf person/child.
2. Resource provision The social workers help the society to be aware of schemes provided by government to fulfill their needs wants e.g., Providing housing schemes, educational loans etc.
3. Prevention: Here the social workers start counselling youngsters or teenagers for stopping drug addiction, future marriage issues etc.

Social problem When a particular social condition or `phenomenon` disturbs social order and
hinders (for something to happen) smooth working of social institutions that can called as ++social problem++. 

Social problems in India: Poverty, Regionalism (Related to a place), Linguism (language related), Casteism, Untouchability, unemployment, Gender inequality, Labour problems, Basic Sanitation, Educational issues.

---

Scope of social work: (SW)
child Developments:
1. This is to ensure healthy growth and development of child.
2. It provides support and education to the children.
3. It also provides resources to parents.

Medical Social Work:
1. Here social work collaborates with medical
professionals to meet the psychological
and emotional needs of patients and
their function families.
2. Clinical social work provides therapy and counselling to individuals, families
and groups dealing with mental health challenges.

International Social Work:
1. This relates to social issues on a global scale. They might work in disaster response, international development, advocacy for human rights etc.


Introduction
Importance
Community Empowerment
6- Step model
Definition
Nature
field work
Objectives
Importance
Steps to conduct field work.

Environmental and conservation programs: These focus on environmental protection, afforestation, waste management, and sustainable development. 

Eg 
1. Swachh Bharat Abhiyan
2. National Green Tribunal (NGT) Skill Development and Employment training programs aims to enhance the employability of individuals by providing vocational training and skill development opportunities.

Eg 
1. Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)
2. National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) Drug Abuse Prevention and Rehabilitation: Focus on raising awareness about drug abuse, provide rehabilitation services, and supporting individuals in recovery.
Narcotics Anonymous

Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyan

Eg:- 1. National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) – (This includes Rescues and Relief operations)
State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)
Elderly care and support:
Programs provide support and care to the elderly population including old age homes and healthcare services.
Example:- 1. National Programme for the Health of the Elderly (NPHE) – (This focus on the healthcare needs of elderly population)
Vayoshrestha Samman National awards for senior citizens that recognize their contribution to society.
Mental Health Services:
Government and NGOs provide counselling, awareness and support to individuals facing mental health challenges.
Eq:- 1. National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Science (NIMHANS)
District Mental Health Program (NHT)2. Educational Services
India provides various education services including government-funded schools, mid-day meal programs, and scholarship and literacy initiatives.
Eg: Sarva Siksha Abhiyan provides free and compulsory education to all children aged 6-14 years.
a. Mid-day meal program.
Social welfare programs
These programs include social safety nets like pension for elderly, widows and disabled individuals.
a. Mid-day meal scheme.
b. Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) guarantees a minimum level of unemployment to rural households. (NREGA)
Eco social work:
Our environment like air, day by day is degrading, natural resources depleted, welfare and soil are being depleted by the non-judicious utilization of human. Being so here the social workers create awareness among the people in following ways:
Encourage purchase of recycled products.
Create awareness about the healthy waste disposal patterns and formal deforestation and formal afforestation.
Gerontological social work:
Aging is common and it happens naturally. Here the social workers provide support and service to the elderly to remain.
Various fields of social work:
Social work are performing their roles in a variety.13. Tribal and Indigenous Welfare (existing is a land form earliest times) special schemes target the welfare and development of fields are hospitals, clinic, community, school, industry etc. Social work have different names like Medical Social Worker, Industrial Social Worker, Psychiatric Social Worker etc.
Health Social Work: This includes the role of social work in medical and psychiatric settings.
Medical Social Work.
Psychiatric Social Work.
Social Work in School: The goal of school social work is the development of all students with particulars attention to those who are disable.
Social Work in Industry: This aims at improving social climate and quality of human relations. This is systematic ways of helping individuals and groups.Essential Elements
→ Educational support
→ ICDS (Integrated Child Development System)
→ Child & family services
→ Health Care services
→ Disability services
→ Emergency assistance
→ Digital India
→ Janitiya Swasth Bima Yojana (RSBY)
→ Mid-day meal scheme
→ Elderly care & support
→ Unemployment benefits
→ PDS (Public Distribution System)
Principles of social work/ social case work.
Principles are statements of Do’s and Don’ts to get best results while practicing social work. Principles are elaboration of the values in the form.
towards better adoption to work situations.
Social work with families and children: the aim of this type of social work is to enable the members of the family to develop their capacities to the fullest extent possible, to lead personally satisfying and socially useful lives. They carry out roles such as family service provider, family court counselor, child welfare officer, child protection officer, career guide etc.
Social work in disaster management: A disaster is a natural or man-made hazard causing significant physical change or destruction of life or drastic change to the environment. Social workers can play a significant role in disaster management. It requires co-ordination, liaison, training and legal actions.*   Principles of controlled emotional involvement.
Social worker should have control on his or her own emotional. Should not involve more in client situation. Should maintain some emotional distance while solving the clients problem.
Social Service:
Social service refers to activities and efforts aimed at promoting the well being and betterment of society as a whole. These services often focus on improving overall quality of human life.
Types of Social Services in India:
Health - care services
Educational services
Social welfare programs
Housing and shelter services
Women empowerment and child welfareInjure
Insure
of understandable true statements to practice a profession, put
Principles of social work/social case work → Principles of acceptance.
→ Principles of individualization.
→ Principles of communication.
→ Principles of confidentiality.
→ Principles of self-determination.
→ Principles of non-judgemental attitude.
→ Principles of controlled emotional involvement.
Principles of Acceptance:
This states that social workers must perceive, acknowledge & establish a relationship with the individual claim as he actually is, not as a social worker but as a friend.6. Rural Development
7. Disaster management and Policy
8. Elderly care and support
9. Mental health resources
10. Environmental and conservation programs
11. Skill Development and Employment
12. Drug Abuse Prevention and Rehabilitation
13. Tribal and indigenous welfare
Health – care Services
These services include public hospitals, clinics, maternal and child health services, vaccination programs, disease prevention campaign, etc.
Example :-
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY)4. Housing and Shelter Services
Government providing affordable housing to the economically weaker sections of society.
Eg: 1. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY)
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY)
Women Empowerment and Child Welfare
Eg: 1. CDS
2. Beti Bachao Beti Padao Yojana
Rural Development
This focuses on improving rural infrastructure, agriculture development, access to clean water and sanitation.
Eg: 1. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)
2. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY)
Disaster Management and Relief.
These services involves preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation during emergencies.Principles of Individualization
This is fundamental to effective social work. Every individual is different from others, as like the our thumbprint. Here, the social worker finds the problem and deals with that particular problem with every individual.
Principles of Communication
Communication is a two-way process. If the communication between people is not good, then problems occur automatically or due to misunderstanding. The social worker should have enough skills to communicate with the client.
The client should be made to feel comfortable and at ease to express his thoughts, feelings, and facts.
Principles of Confidentiality
The social worker should maintain confidentiality regarding the information given by each client.
Principles of self-determination.
Social worker should not force any client to follow his decisions or solutions on a particular problem. Social worker should support the client and encourage to take decisions which are good and acceptable to the client.
Principles of non-judgemental attitude.
Social worker should maintain professional relationship without any bias with the client. He or she shouldn’t consider anyone’s opinion on client situation.
